The API note in the Java specification for the Java, the usual optional class is listed here.
Optional is primarily intended for use as a method return type where there's a clear need to represent
no result.
And we're using now less likely to cause errors.
A variable whose type is optional should never itself be.
No, it should always point to an optional instance.
Okay, so what does this mean exactly then?
Why was this class introduced in Java eight?
Which streams?
Sometimes the answer really is not applicable.
Let's say I want to calculate the grade point average GPA of a student in college, a number of representing
how well the student is doing in his courses.
For a new student, there would be no GPA and a numeric GPA would not be applicable.
I could return no diploma student does not yet have a GPA, but that would prevent me from using my
desired data type a primitive float through.
I could use a float wrapper and return.
No, but any coaches in the field would be tasked with checking for null or being exposed to no point
of exception.
I could do something ugly like give a new student a default GPA of a negative number, which would negatively
impact calculations on GPA or zero point zero.
But sadly, there could be a student who might claim that as their actual GPA.
Enter optional, optional as a way of wrapping a valley that could be something tangible and defined
or could be something not applicable, like a student's GPA when his or her first day of college.
It's a convenience class that allows you to stop checking for no optional is empty when a value is not
known or not yet known or value is not applicable.
Optional has the following static factory methods empty that returns an empty, optional instance of
with T as a parameter returns an optional describing the given non now value and of nullable with the
perimeter of type T returns an optional describing the given value.
If no no otherwise returns liberty optional.
Let's bring back to our code, specifically our Stream Operations Project.
We need to create a new class.
We'll call this one optional tests.
So this code A create a college student class with two attributes, name and GPA to constructors and
some getter and setter methods, noting here that none of the code currently is checking for Noles.
And we've got our optional test class in the main method.
You can say that our starting off, they're creating two instances of students, one with a GPA and
one with no GPA specified.
We're calling the print status method.
The student with no GPA could be a freshman or maybe a transfer student is transcripts have yet to arrive.
And no GPA cannot should not be used to make assumptions about a student's academic level or class standing
and then the prince status, whether they present the student's academic status.
So let's run this.
But you say Joe is in good standing, but Jane, we've got an exception and no point of exception on
line 55 and looking back at our code, you see the genius that's being created using the single act
constructor.
And our float upper class is not initialized with a single constructor instead of Pollner exception.
We could potentially get around this firstly by looking at our print status before we can start doing
some now checking in there.
So let's replace that in time effort.
Because we've got some now checking in there now and we can run this.
That resolves to no point of exception in this instance, but the onus of dealing with a no problem
accepted has been pushed to all consuming code in this instance.
So let's say what option will look like instead?
What are we going to do is start off by going back up to our definitions at the top.
They're going to replace our GPA attribute in college student in overwriting the definition.
Except to hear what I'm doing is I'm setting GPA to be an optional top float and initializing it to
an empty optional using the static method on optional empty best practice as an optional should never
be.
No.
Next, we need to alter the constructor because you can say we've got an error in our two acts.
Constructor.
We're going to do is change it to the optional Durov and pass G.P.A. to that.
That resolves the constructive problem that basically we're just setting the value of the item contained
in the optional class and we need to fix the get it out to return an optional top float.
I'm going to change that to optional type float single brackets.
But we also need to fix our setar turns out to be instead of this total EPA, which will put this optional.
Sort of nullable.
And Evalu, which is G.P.A. that resolves that now, could have used optionally out of here, but the
static method of an option will throw no positive exception.
It's a float, GPA is null and of nullable will not allow this to work here.
Then let's go back down to our current status method.
Let's replace that and get rid of the null.
Checking now going to replace the entire method again.
That really does look nicer, doesn't it?
So therefore, we run this code.
It gives us the same result without any now checking in our print status.
So what if I want to try to do this without writing a method specifically to print the status?
And I want to ignore any students with no GPA.
We can do that by altering the stream pipeline.
Let's have a look at that.
So what I'm gonna do is come sit this one out first.
So you've got a record of that and we'll put in place in the new code.
So the optional class has a method is present, and you saw that online, 63 separate status method,
so is present is true when the contained item is not.
Now you can use the docket method to retrieve the contained value, in this case, a float.
These are ternary operator to give the correct status.
And you can see that they're it's either in good standing or on academic probation.
We've run this now.
We get the result, Joe, in good standing.
That's again, because of the filtering we're using specifically we're looking for, is that our present
with the present method?
There are another thing I could have done but change the filter to this one as follows.
Coming to that line.
And use this instead, effectively looking for not is empty instead of checking where that is present.
That would give the same result.
I think it's better to be testing for is present and checking for, not symptoms.
We're going back to what it was originally.
Either way, there you can see we've got the same result and somehow I accidentally commented out by
the will try that again.
Then we get the result, we should begin by using at least one of those filters, let's send the video
here and then the next one will look at some other methods are optional.
See you in the next video.